
--- Page 1 ---
30  The Experience Machine  Robert Nozick  ...   Suppose   there were   an   experience   machine   that would give you any experience you desired. Superduper neuropsychologists could stimulate your brain so that you would think and feel you were writing a great novel, or making a friend, or reading an interesting book. All the time you would be floating in a tank, with electrodes attached to your brain. Should you plug into this machine for life, preprogramming your life’s experiences? If you are worried about missing out on desirable experiences, we can suppose that business enterprises   have   researched   thoroughly   the   lives   of many others.   You can pick and choose from their large library or smorgasbord o f such experiences, selecting your life’s experiences for, say, the next two years. After two years have passed, you will have ten minutes or ten hours out o f the tank, to select the experiences o f your  next   two years. O f course, while in the tank you won’t know that you’re there; you’ll think it’s all actually hap pening. Others can also plug in to have the experiences they want, so there’s no need to stay unplugged to serve them. (Ignore problems such as who will service the machines if everybody plugs in.) Would you plug in?  What else can matter to us, other than how our livesfeel   from  the inside ? N or should you refrain because o f the few moments   o f   distress   between   the   moment   you’ve decided and the moment you’re plugged. What’s a few  R o b e rt N ozick, “ T h e E xperien ce M achine,” from   Anarchy, State and  Utopia   (Basic   Books,   1974),   4 2 -5 .   R e prin ted   with   perm ission   o f Perseus B ooks G roup and W iley-Blackwell.  moments   o f distress compared to   a lifetime   o f bliss (if that’s what you choose), and why feel any distress at all if your decision   is   the best one? What does matter to us in addition to our experiences? First, we want to   do   certain things, and not just have the experience o f doing them. In the case o f certain experi ences, it is only because first we want to do the actions that we want the experiences o f doing them or thinking we’ve done them. (But   why   do we want to do the activi ties rather than merely to experience them?) A second reason for not plugging in is that we want to   be   a certain way, to be a certain sort o f person. Someone floating in a tank is an indeterminate blob. There is rio answer to the question o f what a person is like who has long been in the tank. Is he courageous, kind, intelligent, witty, loving? It’s not merely that its difficult to tell; there’s no way he is. Plugging into the machine is a kind o f suicide. It will seem to some, trapped by a picture, that nothing about what we are like can matter except as it gets reflected in our experiences. But should it be surprising that what   we are   is important to us? Why should we be concerned only with how our time is filled, but not with what we are? Thirdly, plugging into an experience machine limits us to a man-made reality, to a world no deeper or more important than that which people can construct. There is no   actual   contact with any deeper reality, though the experience o f it can be simulated. Many persons desire to leave themselves   open   to   such   contact and to a plumbing   o f deeper   significance.1 This   clarifies   the  Ethical T heory:A n Anthology,   Second Edition. Edited by Russ Shafer-Landau. © 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

--- Page 2 ---
T H E   E X P E R I E N C E   M A C H I N E   265  intensity o f the conflict over psychoactive drugs, which some   view as mere local experience machines, and others view as avenues to a deeper reality; what some view   as   equivalent   to   surrender   to   the   experience machine, others view as following one o f the reasons  not   to surrender! We learn that something matters to us in addition to experience by imagining an experience machine and then realizing that we would not use it. We can con tinue to imagine a sequence o f machines each designed to   fill lacks suggested for the   earlier machines. For example, since the experience machine doesn’t meet our desire to   be   a certain way, imagine a transformation machine which transforms us into whatever sort o f person we’d like to be (compatible with our staying us). Surely one would not use the transformation machine to become as one would wish, and thereupon plug into the   experience   machine!2 So   something matters   in addition to one’s experiences   and   what one is like. Nor is the reason merely that one s experiences are uncon nected   with   what   one   is   like.   For   the   experience machine might be limited to provide only experiences possible to the sort o f person plugged in. Is it that we want to make a difference in the world? Consider then the result machine, which produces in the world any result you would produce and injects your vector input into any joint activity. We shall not pursue here the fascinating details o f these or other machines. What is most disturbing about them is their living o f our lives for us. Is it misguided to search for   particular   additional functions beyond the competence o f machines to do for us? Perhaps what we desire is to live (an active verb) ourselves, in contact with reality. (And this, machines cannot do   for   us.) Without elaborating on the implica tions o f this, which I believe connect surprisingly with issues about free will and causal accounts o f knowledge, we need merely note the intricacy o f the question o f what matters   for people   other than their experiences. Until one finds a satisfactory answer, and determines that this answer does not   also   apply to animals, one can not reasonably claim that only the felt experiences o f animals limit what we may do to them.  Notes  1.   Traditional religious views differ on the   point   of contact with a transcendent reality. Some say that contact yields eternal bliss or Nirvana, but they have not distinguished this sufficiently from merely a   very   long run on the expe rience machine. Others think it is intrinsically desirable to do the will of a higher being which created us all, though presumably no one would think this if we discov ered we had been created as an object of amusement by some superpowerful child from another galaxy or dimen sion. Still others imagine an eventual merging with a higher reality, leaving unclear its desirability, or where that merging leaves us. 2.   Some wouldn’t use the transformation machine at all; it seems like   cheating.   But the one-time use of the trans formation machine would not remove all challenges; there would still be obstacles for the new us to over come, a new plateau from which to strive even higher. And is this plateau any the less earned or deserved than that provided by genetic endowment and early child hood environment? But if the transformation machine could   be   used indefinitely often, so   that we could accomplish anything by pushing a button to transform ourselves into someone who could do it easily, there would remain no limits we   need   to strain against or try to transcend. Would there be anything left   to   do ? Do some   theological   views   place   God   outside   of time because an omniscient omnipotent being couldn’t fill up his days?
